# Godot Font Trimmer plugin
This export plugin allows reducing the size of font files by specifying which
characters to keep, sourced from one or more content files. All other
characters are discarded, effectively 'trimming' the font - a process
also known as font subsetting.

This is especially useful in projects with Chinese, Japanese or Korean (CJK)
localizations, as fonts for these languages often exceed 10 megabytes,
which can be a problem on size-constrained platforms such as web and mobile.

Using this plugin on [Crossing Chains](https://danijmn.itch.io/crossingchains)
made it possible to trim the Japanese font from 16 MB to only 0.9 MB
(for reference, the game uses about 300 distinct Japanese characters).

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Be careful when trimming fonts if your application displays dynamic text
> created at runtime. In other words, if the user can input text, or if the
> application fetches text from an external source (e.g. a web server)
> whose contents you can't predict in advance, trimming the font may result
> in not being able to display some characters.
> 
> Under such circumstances, make sure to ship the most commonly used characters
> (e.g. by providing a text file to Font Trimmer containing such characters).
> Additionally, enable "Allow System Fallback" on the font's import settings.

### Verified Godot versions
4.5 and 4.6.

### Features
- **Trimming occurs on export:** no need to modify source fonts or pollute
the project with intermediate files.
- **Minimal configuration:** all setup can be done from Project Settings.
- **Caching:** trimmed fonts are cached so that successive exports are
very fast, and the cache is pruned automatically.
- **Preserves font pre-rendering:** your font's Pre-render Configurations
are respected.
> [!NOTE]
> The plugin will not perform pre-rendering automatically for you when
> your text files change, as it cannot guess which of the new glyphs you
> intend to pre-render - this is an inherent limitation of Godot, as
> [documented.](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/ui/gui_using_fonts.html#font-prerendering)
> But it **_will_** preserve pre-rendering of whichever glyphs you last setup.

## Installation
1. This plugin requires [fonttools](https://github.com/fonttools/fonttools) to
be installed and on your system's PATH. This is very easy on Linux, as most
package managers provide an up-to-date `fonttools` package. Similarly,
it is available on macOS via Homebrew. On Windows, the easiest way is to
install the excellent [scoop](https://scoop.sh/) package manager, then
`scoop install python` and `pip install fonttools`
   - Last verified fonttools version: 4.62.1

2. Copy `addons/font_trimmer` to your project's `addons` folder, then enable
the plugin in `Project Settings > Plugins` ("Font Trimmer").

3. Close the Project Settings window, then reopen it. Go to
`General > Plugins > Font Trimmer` and configure the plugin's settings
as described below.

### Settings
- **Fonts to Character Sources:** A dictionary. This is where you define
which font files you wish to trim (keys). For each font, assign one or more
source files containing the textual contents that will be displayed by that
font (in most projects, these will be the `*.translation` files whose languages
are displayed by the font). At export, the plugin will automatically collect
all characters present on the source files, and remove unused glyphs from
the font.

    You may select any kind of file you wish as a character source,
    but the plugin will always interpret their contents as UTF-8 encoded text.
    `*.translation` files are an important exception. These are binary files
    (generated by Godot from your CSV or PO translation sources), but the
    plugin recognizes them and captures the relevant translated strings.

- **Print Progress Messages During Export:** if true, prints non-critical
informational messages during export (mostly to signal that the plugin is about
to trim a font and to inform how much space was saved by trimming).

- **Use Cache:** if true, retrieves cached results from prior exports to speed
up the process, instead of reimporting the fonts again on every export. This
setting exists as a safeguard in case of export failures, because the plugin
relies on some undocumented aspects of Godot's font import pipeline (it checks
the font's `.import` file for the path to the `.fontdata` file and caches it).
If the export fails due to some change to Godot's import pipeline in some
future Godot version, try turning this setting off.

- **Max Cache Size (MB):** the maximum size of the trimmed font cache
in megabytes. Once this is exceeded, the plugin automatically deletes
the oldest entries from the cache. Set to -1 to unrestrict cache size.
The cache is stored in `.godot/font_trimmer`

- **Extra Arguments to Fonttools:** optional array of extra arguments
to pass to `fonttools`. Normally this isn't necessary, unless you rely
on unusual font features which are trimmed away by default. Consult the
[fonttools subset documentation](https://fonttools.readthedocs.io/en/stable/subset/)
for a description of possible arguments.